# Decoupling

Decoupled architecture is a type of computing architecture that enables computing components or layers to execute independently while still interfacing with each other.
Amazon Simple Queue Service (SQS) and Amazon Simple Workflow Service (SWF) are the services that you can use for creating a decoupled architecture in AWS. Amazon SQS lets you move data between distributed application components and helps you decouple these components. 

**Amazon Simple Workflow Service (SWF)** is a web service that makes it easy to coordinate work across distributed application components. In Amazon SWF, tasks represent invocations of logical steps in applications. Tasks are processed by workers which are programs that interact with Amazon SWF to get tasks, process them, and return their results. ***With Amazon SWF, you write a decider program to separate activity steps from decision steps***. This provides you complete control over your orchestration logic, but increases the complexity of developing applications. ***You may write decider programs in the programming language of your choice***, or you may use the **Flow framework**, which is a library for building SWF applications.

**AWS Step Functions** is a fully managed service that makes it easy to coordinate the components of distributed applications and microservices using **visual workflows**. You define **state machines** that describe your workflow as a series of steps, their relationships, and their inputs and outputs. State machines contain a number of **states**, *each of which represents an individual step in a workflow diagram*. States can perform work, make choices, pass parameters, initiate parallel execution, manage timeouts, or terminate your workflow with a success or failure. ***With Step Functions, you write state machines in declarative JSON***. Step Functions keeps track of all tasks and events in an application. You can use Amazon SQS to build basic workflows to coordinate your distributed application, but you get this facility out-of-the-box with Step Functions, alongside other application-level capabilities.
